on the humanitarian situation in Gaza
and in Rafa in particular let's now
speak to Richard Brennan who's the
Regional Emergency director for the
Eastern Mediterranean at the World
Health Organization wh he's joining us
from Cairo thank you for joining us Mr
Brennan uh Rafa as we heard there had
been the only Crossing in Gaza not
controlled by Israel through which much
needed humanitarian aid went through and
also from which were injured and sick
people were transported out of the Gaza
Strip what impact do you see the of this
Crossing having on the people of
Gaza well it makes a a disastrous
catastrophic situation far worse um as
you rightly indicate I mean we hadn't
been getting enough Aid into uh Rafer
into Gaza more generally o over the last
few months uh I mean all assessments
have been that Aid has fallen well short
of of what's required and now our main
Crossing Point has been closed off uh
meaning that food Essential Medical
Supplies water and sanitation equipment
are now far less accessible to the
people of Gaza but then as you rightly
say um also the evacuation of critically
ill patients uh We've struggled to get
medical evacuations out consistently
from Gaza uh today we're expecting to
evacuate 140 patients uh but now that
Lifeline is is closed off um to patients
and of course it's not just the movement
of
um supplies and equipment in and
patients out it's also the movement of
uh humanitarian Personnel in that is now
been paused yeah uh we we've heard that
hospitals in Gaza uh in particular are
in a a really difficult situation having
to operate on a on a quota system for
drug uh drug uh supplies and Drug uh
distribution if this medical doesn't get
in how long can these Health Care
Facilities the remaining ones that are
functioning how long can they go on
for well we have done some contingency
planning and we've prepositioned
supplies uh we've actually had to move a
lot of supplies from our warehouses in
Rafer up to uh the middle area um so uh
you know we can probably get by for
another few days or a couple of weeks
but what you said I think is is vitally
important uh of the 36 hospitals across
Gaza only 12 of them are functioning and
there are partially functioning only
three of those hospitals are in uh in
Rafa serving that population of 1.4 1.5
million people that you mentioned so and
they're only partially functioning now
your your correspondent said NAA
Hospital which is the largest of those
hospitals has stopped functioning we I I
had not heard that we had heard that it
was still continuing to function but
doctors and patients were starting to
move on um that would be absolutely
catastrophic if that were the case it's
it's the main referral Hospital in Rafa
right now it's usually only a 100 bed
hospital I was there two months ago um
it had over 300 patients at that time
more recently it's had upwards of 600 to
700 patients so now because of this
incursion uh access to that hospital um
is extremely limited now for for
patients for ill and injured uh and uh
if it's if it's starting uh to um close
uh close services that that makes things
absolutely Ely disastrous for the people
of RAF a pier we understand is being
built uh to get humanitarian supplies
into Rafa because as we've seen the
border crossings the land Crossings uh
are are closed off and this pier it said
will be operational in the coming days
do you see that having an an impact will
will that help and who's going to be
Distributing the aid once it comes
through the pier how will it all work
from what you understand
yeah no it's they're very good questions
I mean I think the general sense from
the the humanitarian agencies is it will
have a very very modest impact uh we
won't be able to bring in supplies at
scale um it's generally going to be used
for for food Aid primarily for for bulky
items uh we don't see it at this stage
as being the best option for bringing in
medical supplies the land routs are by
far the most effective and efficient
ways of of bringing Aid in and uh there
are still a lot of unknowns as you've
indicated there once the supplies have
been brought in from the peer then how
uh how are they're going to be stored
and distributed we still don't have all
those details so we continue to advocate
for maintaining uh adequate access
through the land Crossings they're
absolutely vital thank you so much for
talking to us Richard Brennan Regional
Emergency director for the Eastern
Mediterranean at wh joining us there
from Cairo thank you very much for your
time thank you very much thank
you make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from Al
jazer